The Joe Rogan experience. Let's just let everybody know what this is about.
You were a game warden or you are a game warden, right.
And what that normally entails is like, you know,
you find a guy and he's got three trout when he's only supposed to have two it's
normal stuff like catching, catching people,
doing something they're not supposed to it.
Just making sure people follow the rules right along the way
you guys started discovering these illegal grow ops where cartels
were growing marijuana and you turn from being a regular game
warden to essentially, well, why don't you let us know how it worked out?
Yeah, Joe, it was,
it was a crazy journey because you don't think of game wardens doing the type of
work we were doing when it come to the, the trespass groups in the cartel issue,
you know? And what do everybody thinks?
They think game Morin's check fishing licenses. Yeah.
Check your deer tag or elk tag. Look for too many, you know, animals, poaching,
spotlighting. And honestly, when I started the job, I got hired back in 1992,
that's what I dreamed of doing. You know,
I grew up hunting and fishing and I got my hunter safety certificate with,
with dad's help at nine years old. So I was all in the woods. You know,
the woods there, my church, I just loved it. It,
because three generations of family, my grandfather's career Navy, my dad,
you know, as an army guy and, you know, we just had conservation in our family,
you know, um, for generations. So I got the job, did it,
and I did all the traditional stuff to start.
I came down here to Southern California to start my career in Riverside county.
So it was just over the hill, you know, from,
from LA here and working all the traditional stuff, fishing regulations,
night hunting, you know,
working deer openers is really cool to be a deer hunter for all those years.
And then actually go, you know,
talk to guys on the other side and see all the good guys out there and some
problems. Um, and then in, uh, 1995,
I got to go back home toward the Silicon valley.
That's where I'm originally from born and raised. So live in the suburbs,
kind of the Foothill areas of the Silicon valley, south of San Jose there.
And in 2004, I I've stumbled into my first, uh,
you know, cartel, what we call a trespass marijuana growth site. And, you know,
to specify this stuff. Now, now that we're regulating, you know,
the last couple of years here in California,
these are not sanctioned marijuana sites. This isn't the legitimate industry.
That's doing it by the numbers and trying to, this is always illegal. Uh,
these are always here, you know, on public lands,
destroying our environmental waterways and our wildlife and on private land as
well. And on that situation, I had a good friend of mine that I grew up with,
um, that was doing his master's thesis at San Jose state university,
both of our Alma mater on steelhead, trout, endangered species, red legged,
yellow legged frog, and all the aquatics and these two creeks.
And this was right below Henry COE state park,
where I really met my first game or, and it was an inspiration to get the job.
So these waterways are really sensitive.
Headwaters coming down through this stretch for like three miles,
all these endangered species in it, Blacktail deer, you know,
all these other great animals. We like as conservationists.
They're thriving on this Creek. And he called me one day in April and said, Hey,
John, this is weird.
One of my two creeks is bone dry and all the fish,
the steelhead fryer dead, you know, everything living on this Creek is dead.
There's a bunch of like debris and plastic lining.
And it looks like camping stuff.
That's down at the bottom of where this Creek feeds out.
So I get them in the truck and I figured I'm thinking, okay,
someone's diverting water up there. It's probably a rancher,
Nina for cattle operation, whatever we go to the top of the hill job.
Then we start the hike down and I'm by myself. You know, I got my,
I got my rifle, got my gear. Don't have any radio coverage,
don't have any cell phone coverage. I have an unarmed civilian,
my partner biologists with me.
And we're expecting to find something very predictable that I'd seen up to that
point. And that would have been a normal water diversion.
And when we found the water source in a beautiful canyon, I mean,
crystal clear water trout Creek, the whole nine start hiking down it,
following this. Uh, we see the dam,
we see the water line go about a hundred yards down,
this beautiful little grand canyon lake Creek.
And there's much marijuana plants. And they're,
they're short because it's early in the season.
They're only about two feet tall and we see two growers and they're not the
growers I'm typically, you know, that I would have suspected these guys are,
you know, they got rifles, they got handguns,
they got knives and they're kind of cruising work in their plants coming toward
us. And that was that, oh, moment. You know,
if something crazy goes down right now and I got no backup,
I got a civilian with me. These guys are armed.
They're not your typical poacher that I've ever encountered. And, um,
we didn't get seen. We kind of hit out, you know, he's a hunter, I'm a hunter.
We stayed, you know, using our stocking and stand to the Creek bank and just,
just watch as these guys work their plantation and went on up the hill.
And I looked at this and went, what did we just walk into? This is crazy. Um,
we got out safely and that's when I started to bring in other agencies,
narcotic groups, task forces, the Sheriff's office, um, ma you know,
started to learn other agencies in my area. This is really on in the game.
What did you guys do about that one grow up? Like when you found it, like,
how did, how do they resolve that? Well,
we got a team together as fast as we could safely.
And usually it takes a couple of weeks.
And I want to say within a month we were back there.
Now the interesting part was game warns.
Aren't known for doing this type of work, just like you said at the start,
right? So they're like, well, you guys know the area you went in there,
help us find it, get us into the area,
but we're going to lead the raid and was said, of course,
this is your jurisdiction. We don't normally do this type of stuff. So, uh,
so go for it. So we were the bird dogs, we kind of guided them into the area.
We, uh, had like 20, 30 officers. We, uh,
kind of let them down to the canyon, got them in there safely. Um,
we found the two growers. We spooked them. They didn't get caught that day.
They, they ran down the canyon. Nobody pursued. Some of us wanted to,
obviously because of the environmental damages.
But the biggest thing that changed the game for me that day was seeing the
environmental damage. So that was a 7,000 plant garden.
And at the time we didn't know about these banned toxic substances,
these insecticides carbo fear end that they're bringing up from Tiawana and
transporting actually smuggling from cross the border to put on these plants,
to keep everything living off of it, not to impact their cash crop.
And that was out there in some extent,
but it was so early when we were really aware of the level of toxicity to this
stuff and how damaging it is. Um, so it was all new, but we,
we eradicated that, that garden. And then when we were done eradicating it,
we had all this mess in the Creek, right. We had camp trash,
we had fertilizers pollutants, propane tanks, um,
all over in this beautiful channel. That's now dry.
Cause it's been diverted unbeknownst to us,
all that water was totally poisoned that they were diverting to water the
plants. That's why that Creek was so dry. Um, and we, we, uh,
we eradicated everything and then it was like, okay, we're out of here.
And I looked around and went, wait a minute, man. I know we got the,
I know we got the illegal marijuana out,
but what are we going to do about all this environmental damage?
And nobody was recommending the damage or, or, or cleaning up any of this mess.
So I, the first thing I thought was we have a resource issue. That's crazy.
I mean, I've, you know, spent my whole career up to this point,
protecting wildlife, preserving waterways for all of us to enjoy, you know,
conservationist, enthusiastic, whatever side of the fence you're on. And, uh,
nothing was getting done on that.
So kind of the light bulb went off a little bit that we need to do more to this
if we're going to get involved and we need to get involved in these types of
grow operations, because it was the biggest environmental, uh, you know,
train wreck I'd ever seen. And I'd worked a lot of traditional game or,
and stuff to, to protect those resources. So once they.
I had gotten another one out and get chopped all the plants up or did what they
did, did they try to reclaim the Creek?
Did they try to remove the dam and get the water to run back again.
At that time? No, no one was doing it right. And that's,
that was exactly rather what, what really, really kind of upset me. And again,
we were new at the game. We were the game wardens.
Nobody really thought of us as mainline law enforcement or, you know,
narcotics task force guys or anything like that at the time.
So I wasn't going to make waves. We just wanted to integrate and work together.
We wanted to unify these teams.
And what I really wanted to do at this point is get back with my command staff
and, you know, my bosses and go, Hey, we got a big, big problem out there, man.
And there's more of this going on and we need to be involved even though it's
not traditional because we're sworn to protect our resources.
And we'll besides everything game wardens do that you think of from the wildlife
standpoint where mainline law enforcement, just like every police officer,
right? We go through the same training.
And then what people don't realize is we go through two more months of
additional training in a really long academy.
That's all wildlife specific wildlife forensics, wildlife ID, weapons,
identification,
all the things you really need to do the game or inside of it with wildlife,
you know, in the back country, so to speak. Um,
but we needed to integrate with other agencies and kind of bring them into our
world if we were going to participate.
So that one case started the change in me to try to
build those relationships and get into tactics and tactical circles with some of
these, you know,
SWAT and special operations units that would go in and do this job.
Under normal circumstances, if that was just being diverted by a rancher.
So if a rancher had done that and the Creek was dry, how would you,
how would you fix that?
We would have got with him. And it it's,
what's called a stream at alteration violation and it's 1602 in our fish and
game code is the section. But, and it's a very common section.
Cause water is diverted for a lot of reasons and you can divert water with a
permit in certain circumstances,
but you can't completely denude a Creek that has wildlife thriving.
That's a waterway of the state for everybody to enjoy which this one was.
And if normally the case would be that they would have to re just have the
flow, come back to exactly how it was before the dam.
And yup. Yeah, that would be up to the rancher.
That would be up to the ranch would be part of a penalty. You know,
it could be a civil, it could be a criminal, it could be a probationary fix it.
And you're okay. So there was no.
Real,
there's no law involved or nothing in place rather to when you found
these grow ops, like there was no previous precedent, right?
Exactly. It was, it was completely brand new. And this was, you know,
one of the first grows,
I think that any of us had found throughout the state of California's game or,
and so me and the other guys finding some things and working,
but being from the Silicon valley and being inspired by those Wildlands to
everything I became later and what I stand for, it was home, you know, and it,
it hit home.
But seeing that and getting to meet certain guys in the Sheriff's department in
my first book goes into this whole learning experience of, you know, ad hoc,
jumping in with other agencies and doing it is this the hidden war.
This was the first book more than the woods war in the woods.
So you wrote war in the woods and then hidden wars, the new one.
Yeah. Hidden wars, the brand new.
And that just came out and they're basically 10 years apart.
And the cool part about that, Joe is when you look at the differences,
we do some major comparisons and what war in the woods covers is that chapter
ones, that first mission I'm telling you about right now,
because that was like being like, here it is, you know,
we're not in Kansas anymore.
Did the people at the higher ups yeah.
That were in charge of trying to eradicate the grow up
and take the cartel, the guys down. What, so there,
that was their job was just handling that it was just handling the,
the marijuana aspect of it. Right. And the armed cartel guys.
So there was no one in place that was supposed to take care of the waterway.
There wasn't, that seems so crazy.
It does. It was one of those things that it was,
it was based on the fact that a conservation group,
like from an agency like fish and wildlife, like us,
we just weren't involved where we would be looking at those environmental
damages. Right. Right. But from a narcotics officer standpoint,
you may see the damages, but it may not register. There might not be a,
you know, a mandate, even objective to clean that stuff up and back at the time,
DEA was funding all of our states and all of our county teams based on the
number of marijuana plants we eradicated.
So there wasn't any recognition of the environmental damages
and any type of funding based on how much reclamation and cleanup you did now,
that would change. Fortunately.
And we were that we were a big part of making that change, fortunately, but,
and there wasn't a lot of, um, funding or, or, you know,
point kickback or value to catching bad guys to catching some of these guys that
were doing the damages.
So a lot of teams then were dropping it on helicopter lines,
cut and plants getting a big plant count, getting funded for it, taking,
taking the weed out. And that was it.
That's so crazy. Like, yeah, I would imagine. I mean, obviously I'm not,
I don't work in law enforcement,
but I would imagine there would be one person who would like detailed plan.
Right. And I would think that, well, what happened? Well,
we found out that this Creek was dry. Yeah. Okay. Well,
we've got to re resume the Creek. Yeah. Wouldn't that be like part of the plan?
It.
Would, you would think it should be right.
But so this is all basically new territory, completely.
New. And so.
We're only talking about 15 years ago as well.
Was crazy. Yeah, it was,
it was the start of a big shift in my career because I saw this as a big
problem. I also, um, up until in 2005, we were on, you know,
one of our first, second, third, since third operations. Since this one,
we just mentioned in 2004 and August 5th, 2005,
the game completely changed because that's when we were involved in our first
gunfight. And that's when my partner warden,
who I trained in the academy, we were partners in the squad.
I had promoted to be the Lieutenant for two and a half counties,
the Silicon valley, Santa Clara county Monterey part of, uh, um, San Benito,
20 days before this incident happened.
And I had young wardens that wanted to participate and do some of the stuff I
was doing with the other agencies on the marijuana, you know, operational front.
And this was, you know,
right above the tech capital of the world right there in Silicon valley and Los
Gatos, we were in really steep arid country. Now,
August right before the zone Deere opener, we were all gearing up for that.
And was three game wardens, three Sheriff's officers. Um,
good Sheriff's officers that we met on that first operation in 2004,
I just gave you the story on. And, um, they were in harvest time,
they were fortified.
They had heavy weapons like SKS as the AK 47 derivative sawed-off shotguns.
And they had the grow setup where they were basically defending it.
And when we came in, there was an ambush shot from one of the growers.
And that was the one shot. The bad guys got off.
And unfortunately that's the shot that hit my partner, um,
through both legs in that bullet,
went through the right thigh and tumbled through his right leg,
then kept going through his left.
So he's down and we're trying to keep him from bleeding out of four
holes for the better part of three hours waiting for an air rescue.
And we had an, you know,
nobody in the country from the standpoint of a law enforcement team had ever
been counter attacked by these growers. We, you know, we chased them around.
They'd run away. Sometimes we'd find weapons. Oftentimes we wouldn't.
But so this was just a real, eye-opener like, what the did we just walk into?
And plus my partner was real close to not making it.
And fortunately he did survive,
or I don't know that we'd be sitting here telling this story and talking about
it.
But that day when I saw how well they were equipped the type of weaponry they
had, um, and the fact that I almost didn't come home that day, I went, okay,
this is super dangerous. We can't do this as standard patrol game,
or we can't do this doing just the traditional stuff.
We should stay involved in it because aside from being so violent,
the environmental damages Joe are the worst I still ever seen.
And they just kept getting worse and worse.
The more operations I'd work in my home county. Right. Um,
so we learned a lot from that. There were a lot of tactical lessons.
There are a lot of teen lessons, a lot of things we could have done different.
And that kind of changed the game where we eventually got to what we're going to
talk about a little bit.